The following is a conversation with Ray Dalio.
His second time on the podcast,
he is a legendary investor,
founder of Bridgewater Associates,
author of a book I highly recommend called Principles,
and also a new book called Principles for Dealing
with a Changing World Order,
that looks at the geopolitics of today,
especially US and China,
to the lens of history,
providing a fascinating model
for the rise and fall of empires
that can be applied to the analysis of our world today.
This is the Lex Friedman podcast.
To support it,
please check out our sponsors in the description.
And now, here's my conversation with Ray Dalio.
When you look at the history of the world,
as you have done in your new book,
Principles of Dealing with a Changing World Order,
what is more important, more impactful, money or power?
They go hand in hand.
They support each other and they compete with each other.
Those who have money have power,
a certain type of power.
That power has to do with all that they can buy,
but it also has the ability to influence
those with political power.
And so you see this throughout history,
this symbiotic relationship.
You know, for example,
between the royal families,
the nobility and the church.
So you see that group of people
supporting each other in various ways,
and then wrestling around with each other
for the money and power among that group.
So the dynamic that's quite classic
is you could look at the parties in power,
back in the 16th, 17th centuries,
you would look at royal families, nobles and the church,
if you're in Europe,
and then you would look at agricultural land,
and there was a certain dynamic.
And that varies over time, it changes.
As those people get thrown out and technology changes,
so when we evolved, when the society evolved,
so that it would produce goods and services,
and you have something like the industrial revolution,
the first industrial revolution, they have machines,
and you have the talent of people that are off the farms,
and then you have a struggling for power.
You see that power mix change.
And so we don't see that same power mix anymore,
but you still see the same dynamic.
You see those with money dealing with those
who have political power around those assets
that are considered most valuable
to particularly the productive assets that produce money.
And political powers usually centered around nation state.
So the major locus is the powers, the nations.
Yes, in 1668, after 30 years of war,
there was the development of nation states.
Before then, I was really the development of countries,
as we know it, that there were borders,
and that within those borders,
those who had control got to control it,
and there would not to be intrusions in those borders,
and that's how we established the nation state.
And then of course, within each country, there is levels.
There is a central level,
and then there is a typically a province
or state level down below,
and then there's a municipal level,
so that each have different levels of power,
and it's the coordination of those
that determines how the country is run.
You write that the quote archetypal big cycle
governs the rising and declining empires
and influences everything about them,
including their currencies and markets.
The most important three cycles
are the ones you mentioned in the introduction,
the long term debt and capital market cycle,
the internal order and disorder cycle,
and the external order and disorder cycle.
Can you describe this big cycle?
There are two orders.
There is an order by a system, how the system works.
So there's an internal order,
that is the internal governance system,
and it's usually set out in a constitution
or some agreements,
and then there's the world order, how the world system.
So for example, in 1945, at the end of a war,
which is basically a fight for determining the world order,
the winners of the fight got together
and created the world system as we now know it.
In 1944, they created the Bretton Woods monetary system
that determined the money, pretty much,
and because the United States won
and had 80% of the world's money,
gold was money then and it has 80% of the world's gold
and it was half the world economy
and it was the great military power,
the order was built around an American world order
so that the United Nations was in New York,
the World Bank and the IMF were in Washington
and they built that new order.
So classically, you have a war
to determine whose rules were following
and then you have the new order being constructed.
After that, there is usually period of extended peace
and prosperity.
Peace suits prosperity and so there's not,
and the reason you have the peace
is because no one wants to fight with the dominant power,
you know you're gonna lose, you've surrendered,
there's been the surrendering, they carve up the world,
they say what it's gonna look like,
who's gonna control what and then you come into
that period of peace and then prosperity
where then there's a working together.
Usually at that point, you've wiped out a lot of the debt,
you've wiped out a lot of the issues,
the class warfare and so on
and then there's good working together.
So those great periods such as the industrial revolution
in the late 1800s or what we've experienced
in the post World War II period are peaceful
and prosperous periods led largely
by the dominant world power.
Over a period of time, since really 1500 and maybe before,
but really 1500 when the Dutch invented capitalism
and what I mean by that,
they invented the first capital markets,
the first stocks and the first stock market,
that since then capitalism has been an effective tool
for building wealth because it got resources
into the hands of inventive people.
That's when we move from agriculture
to the importance of inventiveness of people,
they got resources and then they built that prosperity.
In that process of doing that,
they create wealth gaps naturally.
Those who make a lot of money make a lot more
and then those that don't.
And it also produces opportunity gaps
because for example, those who earn a lot of money
have that wealth.
They have the power to educate their children
in a way that others don't and the gaps grow
and also the debts grow at that time.
When they go around the world with their competitiveness,
they earn a lot of money.
So for example, the Dutch, the Dutch empire,
learned how to build ships that would go around the world.
A key ingredient of this improvement in this cycle
is the improvement of education and by education,
I mean the skills that come from education,
but also civility, the ability to deal with wealth together.
So the Dutch invented ships that could go around the world
and they had military power,
but they were also very inventive society.
25% of the world's new inventions came from the Dutch.
And so as they went around the world,
they also brought their currency
and they brought their military.
They needed the currency, they paid for things
and that currency and then the more that happens,
the more that becomes a reserve currency
and then they have their military.
So they need their military strength
and so you see it evolve in all of those ways.
But over a period of time as they become more successful
and more expensive, they become more expensive.
And newer countries come along like the UK
then learn to build ships from a lot the Dutch
and could do that less expensively.
And also when they become more expensive,
so less competitive and also the work ethic
begins to change.
They believe that since they're richer,
they can enjoy life more.
They don't have to work quite as hard.
And so you start to see the tilt.
Now you started to see the development of the top.
And when you have a world reserve currency,
that allows you to borrow a lot of money
because those who want to save want to hold your money
and that means that they'll lend you money.
And so those countries get deeper into debt.
So you see that they gradually lose their competitiveness
and they get themselves into financial circumstances,
which are not good, and they have large wealth gaps,
which set the stage for downturns.
And when they have downturns, the first question is,
do they have enough money?
And traditionally, money is resources.
So you classically see that the coffers are bare,
that they're spending more money than they are earning
and they run out of money in the coffers.
And their granaries are empty rather than stocked
so that they give them the buffer.
And as that deteriorates, that worsens conditions.
And if they have a rival power that's also challenging them,
they see greater internal conflict over wealth.
And then they have the problems internally
and the problems externally,
which usually results in an internal war
or an external war that leads to the change
and to the new world order.
And to you, the Dutch empire is a good example
that the British, what are some of the key examples
that you think about in the book of this process
that follow the big cycle?
Well, the leading reserve currency empires,
but it applies to all the empires,
were the Dutch, the British, the American and the Chinese.
But you could follow the same pattern.
In the book, it was very important for me
to not just use words and concepts
because that's subjective.
It was very important for me to use actual measurements.
So as you see in the book, you can see every level of this.
You can see where's the education level,
what is the military power, each one of those,
and you can see them back going over the 500 years.
And so you can see the arcs and the composition of those arcs.
And what you see is really in most countries
and most dynasties, you can see that.
But you also can see through those numbers
the health of those countries.
Today, there are statistics that you could,
that are in the book, that show what is the level
of education, what is the level of economic output,
what is the level of military strength,
what is the level of a number
of different measures of strength
so that you can then compare that.
And I think that because they're objective measures
of strength that you could see change,
that shows the picture of where we are today.
And I think one of the most important things
about the book is that it allows people to monitor
how those things are transpiring.
I think for policy makers,
are your policy makers doing a good job?
And there's so much subjectivity in that.
But I think it's very simple.
If those lines on the chart are improving,
if your health index is improving,
then you're moving toward a better life.
So that's what the book works like also.
It was used to create a model for the future.
In other words, there are cause effect relationships.
Everything that happens has reasons, causes,
that preceded it, that made it happen.
And so by having all those in numbers,
one can see the probabilities of certain things happening.
So that's what you see in the book.
It's not just raise interpretation.
I didn't wanna make it raise interpretation
because I don't know if I'm right.
Yeah, so one of the fascinating things in the book,
see I've listed these 18 measures.
And there's like a little scorecard
for the countries of the world today.
So let's say US, China and Europe.
And what it was 20 years ago,
I'm looking at the change from 20 years ago.
And that's another indicator,
the change itself to see where things are headed.
Maybe can you comment on, from a score perspective,
how is US and China doing?
And in the 18 measures, what are some measures
that stand out to you as particularly important
to think about today for the United States, for China?
Well, there are a number.
Financially, what you see in the United States
is that we're borrowing a lot more money,
creating a lot of debt,
and we're printing a lot of money.
And our capacity to do that is very much,
is limited, first of all,
because when there's a sale of a bond,
when the government borrows more than it,
borrows money because it spends more than it takes in,
you have to sell a bond.
And the world right now has a lot
of US dollar denominated bonds
because as the world's reserve currency,
they sell, so on them.
And they have very bad returns, negative real returns,
negative real returns significantly and so on.
So that means that more bonds has to be sold
than are bought.
And that means that the Federal Reserve
has, is faced with the choice
of having to raise the interest rate
to curtail borrowing, which slows the economy
and hurts the markets,
or by filling that difference
and producing money, the debt monetization,
which produces an inflation in goods,
services, and financial assets.
So in that regard, that's the United States's position.
In China's case, its balance of payments is better.
China has displaced the United States
as the world's largest trading country.
In other words, more exports to other countries.
And as a result, it's economically competitive,
but it doesn't have the world's reserve currency.
It's a real blessing.
So the United States, it has the world's reserve currency,
but it is risking it because of this imbalance.
So if you look at history, you see that those go slowly,
but when they go, eventually, they go quickly.
So there's a risk of that financially.
Then there's the issue of internal order.
So I'm just giving you the major ones,
but I'll get into some of the other ones too.
Right now, there's a lot of internal conflict
in the United States, which affects how well it works.
In China, there's less internal conflict
because it's a more autocratic state,
but also they've created this bifurcation
what is political and what is economic
in terms of producing that prosperity.
So if you stay out of the politics pretty much,
and then you're seeing entrepreneurship,
you're seeing the finances of new businesses and so on.
And so that internal working,
that's subject to different people's interpretations,
whether they like it or not,
but the internal conflict
in terms of those kinds of measures is less.
Sorry to pause on that for a second.
So these measures, I guess you don't want to sort of romanticize
any one measure or something like that
overinterpret any one measure,
but is internal conflict always a bad thing?
Is it a complicated calculation,
or do you kind of,
the way we think about these measures
that you've presented,
we should be thinking like the higher, the better,
the lower, worse, or I mean, of course,
depending on the measure.
In many cases, the conflict that produces the revolution
produces revolutionary changes
that lead to resolutions and lead to new starts.
And so their short term,
a short term civil war is a hellacious experience.
And at the same time,
it can be the transition to a new beginning.
Also, there are different types of conflict.
Competition, which makes things,
makes everything better is a productive conflict,
whereas destructive conflicts are not good
over the short time.
So that's how those go.
So within each measure, the story is complicated.
Yeah, but my measures are sort of clear,
meaning how much political conflict,
how much social conflict,
in other words, you can measure conflict,
you can measure fighting,
you can measure crime rates,
you can measure lots of different ways of conflict.
So the measures are a composite
of different types of internal conflict.
What are some other interesting measures?
Maybe if you could also mention that
for me in particular interest is education and innovation.
Yes.
The classic cycle,
the most important leading indicator
is the quality of education.
Most importantly, broad based education
drawn from the largest population
because you can never tell who the talent is going to be,
where they're gonna come from.
So for example, if you look at the Chinese dynasties,
the great Chinese dynasties and the Confucian approach,
it was meritocratic of everybody could sit for exams
and so on, broad base of drawing in the populations.
And you see that if you go across societies
because that draws on the largest number of population
to get education.
And it also, that creates a reality and a perception
that the system is fairer, equal opportunity,
not just one of privilege.
And that helps to create social stability.
But education is not just education in understanding facts
and so on, it is education in civility
of how to behave together.
And so if they're smart,
they understand how to be productive
because they work well together and they're productive.
And then that leads to the next stage.
You could see in the lines in the charts,
I plotted these so that you could see in a typical cycle,
you could see that education is the long leading indicator.
And then you could see, as you mentioned,
that what you see is inventiveness
and technology measures then follow.
And you see then also competitiveness
and world markets follows.
For example, in the early stages of a cycle,
the industries that they go into tend to be
very basic industry because they have cheap labor,
something like textiles and simple manufactured goods
and so on.
But as the education rises,
then they move up the value chain to greater technologies
and so on, which raises incomes and raises productivity.
So yes, those and as you say,
there are 18 different measures like that,
but education and then civility and the inventiveness.
So you see it reflected in who's inventing what.
And that corresponds then who's trading with,
who's a big trading country?
And where's the value of economic output
and what are per capita incomes?
They all follow those arcs.
Yeah, like you said, the fascinating thing about your book,
so there's philosophy, there's wisdom, but there's plots.
Yeah, you could see it.
So it's not just your opinion, it's kind of like
you can interpret it in any way you like,
but you're just giving a lot of your own insights
along with the numbers.
If you were to look at the American nation,
the American empire and the trajectories looking
into the future, given these measures,
what is the trajectory that leads to the collapse
of the American empire based on these measures?
What are the concerning indicators?
And if those break down further, what does that look like?
Well, all of those indicators are concerning,
maybe except for one, which is technology,
the technology niche, although even in that area
of the United States is improving at a slower rate
than is China for various advantages that they have there.
They put out about eight times as many computer engineers,
they have free data, and so on.
But if you look at them, so the financial is a concern,
the internal order, disorder is a concern.
Then if you look at education levels,
the United States is in many ways is losing
its educational advantage.
If you were to compare it with China,
if you take general public education in the United States,
it's deteriorated tremendously,
even in comparison to developed countries.
There are scores, pieces scores, and so on,
and it's something like 38th in the world or something,
and that was a big plunge, average public education.
If you look at the best universities in the world,
the United States is unique
in having the best universities in the world.
So there are these privileged spots that are excellent,
uniquely excellent.
So when you look at the comparison,
education in China is improving rapidly,
and the quantity is a quantity of educated people
in the areas that they're moving in are, is greater,
and the resources that they're putting behind it is greater,
and so you see the results are greater,
but it's sort of along the lines that I'm dealing with.
If you were to follow through in terms of actual productions,
I think, you know, in terms of technologies,
there are some areas that the United States is in a lead.
At the moment, there's some areas that China's in a lead,
but China's gaining very quickly.
When I first went to China, 1984,
I would bring $10 calculators,
and I gave them away as gifts to high ranking people,
and they thought they were miracle devices.
Right now, in terms of areas like quantum computing
and AI and, you know, many areas,
you have a race going on,
and so if you take the trajectory of the competitiveness,
not just look at the current level,
you have a situation where they're improving
at a much faster rate.
This is all good for the world,
if the world can get along.
And the main thing I think is,
in just, how do you have a healthy world,
and how do you have a strong economy,
and how do you have a strong situation, is be strong.
The United States's war is with itself.
That's the main war.
You know, it's very simple in history.
Be financially sound, earn more than you spend,
and be strong in these ways,
and pretty much everything will take care of itself.
But you make it sound simple, of course,
because there's a momentum when things degrade.
When the education system degrades, when you start borrowing,
when, I mean, all of these indicators,
once they start going down,
there's a momentum to it, right?
So it's hard to reverse it.
Right, and there are circumstances that you're then in.
For example, indebtedness, you know,
it's politically desirable
for those to borrow money and spend,
because their constituencies only look at what they get.
And when they get a lot,
they don't pay attention to the balance sheet
and how much debt is on the books.
So it's always better to borrow, spend,
and then leave the cleanup to the next guy.
And so you inherit a lot.
You inherit it as a new president enters in,
or new legislators.
They have a lot of debt.
They have a broken down infrastructure.
They don't have enough money to fix that.
And so that's the lay of the land
that the prior generations put you in.
And there you are.
And so that's right.
It's difficult, because when you start to think,
okay, what's healthy?
Well, earn more than you spend.
Well, that's not so easy,
because, you know, what does that mean?
Go earn more?
I mean, okay, that's not so easy.
Spend less, that isn't gonna work.
So now what do you do?
Okay, you have this debt that you then monetize,
and that's why it's classic.
So yes, that's why these cycles occur,
because what has created before,
what happened before created the lay of the land
that is then increasingly difficult to deal with.
So what can great leaders do in this moment?
I mean, maybe my sense is leadership is crucial here.
So for example, to do very large projects
that invest in the education system,
that sort of try to fix the fundamentals,
or maybe invest more and more into the innovation
and the development of new technologies and so on.
It feels like that just doesn't happen organically.
So you have to have strong leaders
that convince the populace of the importance of these ideas.
Well, I completely agree with your list.
What we have is a situation where everybody
has their opinions,
and they have to sort of get them exactly right,
and they all fight with each other
about whether their opinions.
So the most important thing is that we become bipartisan
so that we don't, and we get over our differences.
I would have a bipartisan cabinet.
I would draw upon both members of both parties,
the moderates, who are going to be able to work together.
So as then we have one country,
and then we deal with those in a means
that works for the majority of the people
in the middle rather than the polarity.
I think our greatest risk is in not being able to do that.
So I would say that's of paramount importance
because we have the resources, you know, wealth,
real wealth and science and everything
has never been better than it is.
But the notion is that it has to work
for the majority of people,
and we have to keep it being productive.
So that group has got to calmly and knowledgeably
work together so that they increase the size of the pie
and they create broad based prosperity.
So that is of paramount importance.
Whatever they do, if they do it that way,
I can say I'm happy about
because that other alternative
is the really scary alternative.
The scary alternative,
the different ways it has evolved throughout history,
some of it has led to wars.
What are the future trajectories
that lead to a potential war with China?
Cold war or hot war?
Is this something you think about?
Is this something you're worried about?
Yeah, I'd like to talk about both wars.
So the war with China,
as I say, there are five kinds of wars.
There's a trade war, technology war,
geopolitical influence war,
capital war and military war.
As far as military war goes,
I think it's only a Taiwan issue,
but that's a big issue.
And we could talk about that for a minute.
But those others, there'll be rough competitions
and we'll have that type of evolution over a period of time.
That's what that war looks like.
Taiwan has been, for a long time,
a sovereignty issue to China.
And it has its roots in what's called
100 years of humiliation.
From the 1840s to 1949,
foreign powers came in, took advantage of China.
They had the opium wars in such times.
And that represented the 100 years of humiliation.
And Taiwan represents their sovereignty
and their important thing.
And 50 years ago, starting 50 years ago,
there was an agreement that there is one China
and Taiwan is part of China
and that there would be peaceful reunification.
The peaceful reunification hasn't happened.
And in their view, that's a very big issue.
And so it's a big contentious issue.
And that could produce a military war,
could produce a military accident,
could produce, it's a very tense situation.
And if we had a military war, God help us
because of the capacity in all different new ways
to inflict harm on each other.
But anyway, that's that.
If you don't have that military war,
you'll have the competition
between those other kinds of wars.
And whoever is strongest in those areas will win.
Where do you put cyber war within the five?
Well, cyber war is a military war.
I'm assuming the type of cyber war
that you're referring to is that which it's used
to inflict pain on the other party through cyber.
So cyber wars, you'll see cyber war.
You could see space war.
You can see drone warfare.
You, new types of warfare,
not just the traditional and nuclear type of warfare,
but you could see any of the above.
What are the defining characteristics?
What are the interesting things about Xi Jinping,
the president of China, as a leader on the world stage?
His father was a early leader.
He was himself in the Cultural Revolution in times,
in the Cultural Revolution in times, treated brutally.
And during that period of time, it was very, very difficult.
And he came up through the ranks
and he's a very intelligent man.
When he first came to power,
as you know, they have two five year terms
and we're now coming to the end of the second
of those five year terms.
When he first came to power,
he felt that there should be a lot of reform
and reform meant moving to much more of a market
and open economy.
When that happened in him coming in,
I had some contact with economic policy makers,
but in the circumstances then,
where that five major banks lent to state owned enterprises
and local governments with implied government guarantees.
And so there was not control of that
and the movement to aim more of a market economy.
And the development of markets was a primary
and also the dealing with the corruption issue.
There was a lot of corruption prior to that
and that was viewed as an existential threat to the system.
So that became the primary objective.
And then as time progressed over those 10 years,
there was a lot of changing
in the world, their financial circumstances,
opening many, many other markets.
They particularly getting money
to small and medium size enterprises
and developing a lending system
and then establishing controls on it.
So right now, there's a vibrant capital markets.
You can raise capital, you can be an entrepreneur,
you can become a billionaire in the capital markets
and they developed the markets
to be the second largest capital markets.
At the same time, they had to deal with their rising debt
issue, which they began to deal with really
about four years ago when the second term began
and then Lou Ha became the vice premier
responsible for that and to deal with those issues.
So you see right now that what's happening
is the dealing with the real estate bubble.
There was a development in real estate, a bubble,
which produced a lot of unproductive lending.
And Xi Jinping said, houses are meant to live in
not to speculate on and so that was wasteful.
So they established what they call three red lines
which are financial ratios
that the property developers had to live within
and that is then causing the adjustments
that are going on now, which in my view are very healthy
because whenever there's bankruptcies
and so on in the public think, okay, that's a problem.
It's in many cases really a cleaning up of bad debts
and bad practices and so that's what's going on.
So that's, let's say economically.
At the same time, there is the changing relationships,
the changing world order, the changing relationships
with the United States and other countries
which is becoming much less cooperative
and much more warlike, much more confrontational.
Those two things, the domestic debt problem
and the domestic has led to what's called core,
what they call core leadership,
which means a leadership more around him
that is less challenging because they believe in history
that during very difficult times,
a more centrally controlled decision making process
lends itself better than to a more fragmented
political contentious project.
And that's basically what's going on now.
You said it very eloquently,
but you mean the leadership is surrounded by yes men
and there's a lot of centralized control.
That characterization is much more black and white
than it really is.
But it leans towards that direction.
Like for example, of the standing members
of the Politburo, four are more alleged,
a lot of them, three are less so.
You have to understand that it's kind of a collective
leadership at the top and then of course
there's just jockeying for power
in a highly political sense at the top.
But no one leader can be successful
against all those powers at the top.
So it's very politically negotiating.
It's very much more like if you put in the United States
the Democrats and the Republicans
and they had to be in the same government
and they work it out, it's kind of something like that.
And so that's that struggle, but it's an internal struggle.
Where do you put the importance of some of these ideas
at the founding of the United States
when then, now we're talking about that
at the context of China, the freedom of speech, freedoms.
What China is doing with the central management
of a lot of things, it's enabling a lot of growth,
but it's also limiting people on the very basic level
in terms of freedom, the kind of freedom
that I think can lead to entrepreneurship,
to starting new businesses, to having big dreams
and chasing those dreams and then creating totally new things
in whatever the space, maybe technology
and in business and whatever.
How important is that as a metric for society?
Well, they have a view which is the idea of a dialectic
which means that everything comes with pros and cons
and two opposites exist.
And you want the benefits of those two opposites
and how do you deal with the benefits
of those two opposites?
So let's say you want the capital markets
because it gets money into the hands of the entrepreneurs
who are motivated, they build fortunes
and that drives an economy to do very well.
And at the same time, it produces the other problems,
the wealth gaps, the other problems,
then the debt cycle that we're talking about and so on.
And Deng Xiaoping, how do you reconcile communism
and the market economy and the capital markets?
And he famously said, and it doesn't matter
if it's a white cat or a black cat,
just as long as it catches mice.
In other words, if it works in making the country richer,
then that becomes the objective
and then they move that along.
So there are these conflicts and one of the leaders
described it to me as follows because it's confusion
and it goes back over a period of time.
There's a hierarchy and it's an extension
of the family he described it.
And he said, the United States is a country
of individuals and individualism.
And that is its vibrancy that we see.
The individual rights to speak up,
the individual protection of the individual,
individual property rights and all of those things
is of paramount importance.
And we build our organization.
That's why democracy is from the bottom up
or even a company will get together
and we'll be partners to prosper together.
That is the American approach.
He was describing that in China,
it's an extension of the Confucian family, essentially.
And so it's almost like there's a hierarchy.
And so what they think about is the common good,
not the individualism.
So for example, if they want a high speed rail
to go from one place to another
and that's best in the common good,
then the individual protections
that would stand in the way of doing that
would be of secondary concern.
So that notion of controlling.
So for example, what they're doing with video games,
they control what type of video games
and how many hours a day kids can be on video games
operating in that way.
Because they believe that that's good for the society
and that's very controlling.
In the United States, I think probably most parents
would say leave it to me
and it's a matter between me and my kids.
The same thing has to do with data.
In other words, in the United States, who controls the data?
Does the company control the data?
Do you individually control the data?
And so the inclination would be to figure that out
but nobody would say that the government
is going to control the data
because of our inclination of really anti government control.
In China, it would be that the government
will control the data
because that's going to be best for the society
and it depends who you trust.
But that's, so that difference in philosophy
is very much at the heart of that.
As far as your question in terms of effectiveness,
it really is, in China's case,
it's how you balance the things, right?
So what they're attempting to do is to create
a lot of freedom and creativity
in areas that are not political, let's say.
And so you see a lot of entrepreneurship,
you see a lot of product development,
you see a lot of creativity happening in that way.
So the stereotype that you don't see creativity happening
is an old stereotype.
Whereas a lot of creativity is certainly happening
and the system can work well
if they can achieve that kind of balance.
It's proven to work well.
Since I started going there in 1984,
per capita income, real per capita income
is increased by 26 times.
The longevity rate is increased by 10 years.
The poverty rate has fallen from 88% to less than 1%
in terms of basics like starvation and things.
And if you read history, Plato's Republic,
he talks about the cycles, democracy and autocratic
and the benevolent despot and all of that.
Each has their own vulnerability.
The vulnerability of democracy,
which has been a remarkable, remarkable system.
And I don't have to extol the benefits of it.
But the vulnerability of it has always been
the internal conflict that produces itself as anarchy.
In World War II, four democracies
chose to be autocracies
because there was internal disorder
and the belief will somebody bring about order
and get control of the situation.
That was in Germany, Italy, Japan and Spain.
There were parliamentary systems
that turned themselves over to that.
So both systems have vulnerabilities.
I think the main thing that we need to think about
is those vulnerabilities.
Democracy is an amazing system
because the adherence to the rules and the system
and the checks and balances is quite amazing.
And it gives it a flexibility to change without civil wars.
But there has to be the respect of the rules.
And when you see something like they will not accept elections
or they will not accept rules,
history has shown when the causes that people are behind
are more important to them than the system.
The system is in jeopardy.
So we have a situation that's very much like that
in terms of let's say the 2024 elections.
I believe that there's a very high chance
that neither side will accept losing, for example.
And so we have that kind of a situation.
So one would hope that one could rise above the disagreements
and rely on the system for resolving disagreements
because if that doesn't happen, then we have our own chaos.
So the kind of the trend that started in 2020,
or I mean, I suppose it's been there, it's been growing.
One representation of this internal disorder
has been the growing trend of being skeptical
about the results of the election.
Well, it started before that.
There was the emergence of population
before President Trump was elected.
He was basically elected as a populist
because there was a large percentage of the population
that felt that the system didn't work for them.
And he tapped into that.
And he was largely elected as a populist leader,
first populist leader in a developed country.
And so populism began that then.
And that was a battle of one group against the other group.
And so since then, it's been like that
and it continued to grow.
You've mentioned the vulnerability of democracy,
the internal disorder is the vulnerability of democracy.
What's the vulnerability of a system like China?
Maybe one way to say is put China aside
and look at history, look at Soviet Union.
What's the vulnerability of a communist type system?
Well, I'll call it both communist and autocratic,
depending on how much autocracy,
is that it lacks flexibility.
It lacks the ability,
but I should deal with them differently.
In other words, there's the economic system.
The economic system threatens motivation and productivity.
So communism or socialism has to be done in a way
where you can threaten productivity.
Capitalism has, and what I mean by that,
I mean free markets and capital markets
have been an effective way of allocating resources
and also creating the incentives and the resources,
providing the resources for the inventiveness of new ideas.
And so if I compare that,
what the Chinese have done to a large extent
is to recognize that and have made a move.
That's why the seeming dialectic or the conflict
between those two things exist.
But anyway, that's it, as far as an autocratic system,
rather than one man, one vote from the population up.
The risks of the autocratic system
is that there's enough discontent that arises
that the system doesn't have the flexibility
and that rather than bending, it breaks.
That's the big risk.
The notion of trying to control a population
if there's that rather than giving it the flexibility.
So that would be the big risk of the autocratic system.
What's the human,
because you mentioned like the top gets bigger
with the empires and you start to get things for granted.
Is some of this just human nature?
So the concern with China, with the autocratic nations,
the concern with the Third Reich, the Soviet Union,
was that fundamentally at the individual level,
the humans involved at the top,
they start becoming,
they're starting to lose touch with the reality
in a way that no longer makes them.
I guess that's the representation
of the flexibility that you're referring to.
Well, I mean, in a democracy, you could change.
You can go as far left or as far right.
You can change the leaders easily.
And so the people don't become,
they pretty much only have themselves to blame.
And one of the problems of that
is they may not choose the best leaders,
but they have that flexibility.
So vote and you get what you wanted.
In the case of the autocratic, let's say leaders,
and then the movement from democracies to autocracies,
what you see normally that movement
is that one of the systems is not working.
Let's say the democracy is not effectively.
Everybody's arguing with each other
and nobody's getting anything done.
And like Mussolini, the trains are not running on time.
And that would be the example.
Geez, this place has gotten chaotic.
Well, somebody get to control.
And then you get the autocratic,
and then he's autocratic enough to boss people around.
And then you follow those kinds of orders.
And it's like maybe a CEO in a powerful company
ordering around and that could work well
or it could work badly.
You know, most companies are run
as like autocracies in a sense.
You know, there's the hierarchy and the command economy
and that kind of thing.
And that can work well or not,
but then quite often when you get the populist autocratic,
their personality is something that they wanna fight
and they become more nationalistic
and they tend to become more militaristic.
And human nature at that stage
lends itself to fighting.
There's an arc here that when we think of a country
and we say we and we think of a country,
it's not true, it's not like that.
There are individuals who change.
One generation dies and another generation comes along.
And one of those arcs is that the ones
who have been through war don't wanna go to war
and are more happily willing to abide by
whatever the rules are.
As you get farther along into that cycle
and you get a new generation
and they forget about wars and the horrors of wars,
then they want to fight.
And so you're seeing right now the emergent of fight for right.
And what that means is you see it internally,
fight, where are you in fight for that thing?
And they mean fight.
And then into externally, fight,
are you going to be the strong one who will fight and win?
And that develops on both sides, this fight and win.
And each side is cheering each other on into a war.
But that comes by those who really have not experienced war
because it comes in their part of their lifetime.
Humans are fascinating.
And by the way, human nature has not changed
over the thousands of years.
So it's so interesting,
because like in doing this study,
and it comes across in the study,
it's like watching the same movie over and over again.
You see the arc and you see it happen over and over again.
The only things that seem to change
are the clothes people wear and the technologies.
Yeah, and then somebody probably will disagree with you
about the clothes.
Maybe there's also cycles within fashions.
Maybe we're not even creative there.
What do you make of Russia and Vladimir Putin?
What do you think about Putin as a leader,
as a human being on this world stage,
within the context of the cycles of empires
that you think about?
Well, Putin came to power
at the failure of Russia's last order.
So there was the end of communism.
And there was the development of the market economy,
the collapse of the Soviet Union.
And at that time,
he was appointed by Yeltsin,
who was an alcoholic and had problems,
managing and was put into power.
And the conditions in the Russian were,
there was anarchy.
There was no money.
It had the classic end of cycle ingredients.
It was broke.
It was three people fighting with each other.
It was in the anarchy.
And that's when he came to power.
And there were not institutions,
the whole thing,
and collapsed.
And it was not effective ministry of education,
ministry of anything.
And so the idea was that
they needed 25 years of stability
and they needed a democracy
and they needed the improvement of capital markets.
So he's been in that position
as a,
as I guess I would call him,
a semi autocratic leader in that,
from all indications,
he would respect the democracy.
And he's very popular.
He's won democratic elections
because he's been a strong leader
and he's brought peace and stability
to Russia after the breakup of the Soviet Union.
And he's a strong leader
in pursuit of the country's interests
in a way where Russia is not
a significant economic power,
but it is a significant military power.
So the issues,
and then there's a strong alliance
between Russia and China now.
So that's kind of the lay of the land.
And then there are sensitivities.
The Ukraine issue is a sensitivity
because there are a lot of Russians
who live in the Ukraine
and there's also the issue of NATO on their border.
So there are those kinds of things
and he has military power
and he has a strong alliance with China.
And I guess that's my best summary
of what his position is.
Strong leader, popular.
These are not subjective interpretations.
These are objective interpretations.
Yeah, it's interesting just in this conversation.
You're not sort of doing the usual criticism
in any one particular system.
You're looking at these systems
from the perspective of history.
You're just describing how they work.
It's often times when you talk about
what Russia is today
or what Soviet Union was
or what China is today,
is you start to criticize
while they do this kind of censorship
or they do this kind of,
they limit freedoms in this kind of way.
But you're just kind of describing this
as a nation with ideas
to get it to work.
This is why it's working.
This is what's not working.
Here's metrics that show that it's not working.
I think that's a refreshing way to think about it.
It's easy though.
You got some criticism
saying that I think China is a strict parent.
Some people criticize these countries
for violating human rights.
I suppose there are some people
that criticize the United States
for violating human rights.
But what are your thoughts
on the world stage today
about some of the
behaviors it has governed
in terms of respecting the rights,
the basic rights of human beings?
You described accurately
how I just tried to
look at things in a non...
I don't want to impute
my values
on anybody
but I mean
there are intolerable things
so I'm not saying there aren't
intolerable things.
But one of the great things
of being an American here
is that I grew up with
all different nationalities
having all different points of view
and all different religions
and all different ways of operating.
And I've come to treasure
the fact that
what's their business
and then the question is
where do you cross the line
under what circumstances
that others have got to do it my way
and then when you do it
internationally
the issue of what is a sovereign state
which
as I say in the piece of Westphalia
and you have borders
and then when do you cross the line
that
my way of doing things
has got to be their way of doing things
and so that's a very
delicate question
or a very difficult question
and we all have responsibilities
to different parties
and we all have different levels of knowledge
about those particular things.
So
for example
as an international investor
I have a responsibility to my investors
those who run companies
have a responsibility
to theirs of how do they run that
so if you're taking
Nike
or sneakers and so on
and Americans can decide
whether they want to buy Chinese products
or not buy Chinese products
we are all faced with those types of choices.
So you have
what do you want to do in your constituency
and you have your choices
and then beyond that
in many cases the issues are quite complex
like there are geopolitical
questions that enter into it
so
and then I believe that
if you
disconnected
if all those
if entities like myself
the businesses
doing business with China disconnected
I think that that would be
disastrous economically disastrous
and it would also be
reduce
the understanding
that comes from working together
to reduce wars
and so these are all complicated
so what we do
is
and who makes it my opinion matters the most
why should it be my opinion that matters
the most in making that decision
so I largely look at
the government guidance that I get
not only from my own government
but from the other governments and I follow the rules
I'm in 40
we invest in 40 countries
and we want to do that in the best way
the diversified portfolio
and we sort of need that
every one of those countries has
similar complexities
there are always one issue
or another and there's only so much
that we really understand
about all of those issues so we rely
largely on the guidance that we get
yeah you have to empathize
and show respect to the culture
of the place the way things are done
you don't necessarily
the way you heal
relationships between nations
like you said
you work together
and that requires
kind of
to listen
maybe more than you talk
and I think people in the public sphere
talk a lot
about China without really listening
without understanding much about China
one of the things that makes me really sad
because I know how to speak Russian
and I
know how much is lost in translation
it makes me sad
that I'll never really get to know
the Chinese culture because
like I'll never really get to know the language
the literature
just talk to regular people
it's not just the government or officials
or scientists just regular folks
and get the culture
I think if you don't understand the culture
just the basics of the human nature
what people
love about their country
about their family
what kind of hopes they have
what kind of values they have without that
you're not going to be able to
fully
connect with them
and you have to do that first
to have a chance of building a good world
I couldn't agree with you more
I was very lucky because
as I say
since 1984
so for more than half of my life
I've been going there and I
and the common people
and all sorts of people
and I've got to meet them
I don't speak the language
but
a combination of through translators
or them speaking English
and being in situations
I had my son go to school
a local school
and we developed those kinds of
understandings
I think that
to know the other
perspective
is the thing that's most scary
like I'm right now in the middle
and
all I want to try to do
is to help
a mutual understanding
you're right if there were questions
probing me, asking me
what is it? I'm not on one side
or another
I don't want to be on one side or another
I believe that each has their right
in there to approach their different culture
in their own way
so many ways you gave an example
if they're not
doing harm to others
but that issue
of
trying to understand
is
so much better
that doesn't mean agree with
if you are
wanting to
out clever and out compete somebody
it still pays to
understand what they're thinking
so to achieve
understanding of what they're thinking
even if you want to go to war with them
that understanding is the best thing to have
what we have now
is a situation
in which there's an enemy
mentality and that means
that anything
that seems to be
like understanding
or conveying understanding
needs to mistakenly create the notion
of
I'm on their side in a war
and that's kind of a dangerous thing
because
there's a momentum here to fight
Henry Kissinger praises your new book
and you thank him in it
in the dedication
what's your relationship like with him
what makes him interesting
maybe what makes him controversial
what makes him such a central figure in history
first, most importantly
he's unique about seeing things
through all
the others eyes
so if you were
it's like there's a chess game
I mean I think geopolitics
is like
a chess game but with multiple chess players
playing the same game
so imagine there are
six people around
playing the chess game
and he could sit in each seat
and he could know how
they see it
and see it in a calm
way of how they see it
he's unique in that way
he's 98 years old
and he's equally able to do that
and he has a background
in which he's a historian
so he really understands
history super
terrifically
he doesn't understand
economic history as much
so that's why to some extent we enjoy
having a conversation
because he's interested in the
economic piece he doesn't know
and I'm so interested in the
geopolitical piece that I don't know as well
but anyway he's able to do that
but not only a historian
but a practitioner
so when you go from
an academic
to a practitioner
who has that talent
to see things through
others eyes in an objective way
and to be strategic
rather than just tactical
that's a very special person
and that's why Henry is
to me a very special person
yeah he's lived a fascinating life
just all of the
world events he's been involved in
is fascinating
and like you said that's such
an interesting skill to have
to consider what are the concerns
the hope, the dreams, the fears
of all the people at the table
thinking
I find that people don't
once again don't do that enough
when it's the obvious thing you should be doing
whether it's business deals
or
political negotiation
or geopolitical negotiation
I'm often surprised again sorry to go to the Russian
thing because I hear
sort of like
I hear Putin talk in Russian
and you start to infer certain intentions
like not the trivial stuff
like the human being
what is that human being hoping
for himself, for his country
for his close in a circle
for the bigger
and I just see that that's often
just lost in translation
I just see like American leaders
talking to Putin
and it's just not
there's not a connection
absolutely I know exactly what you're talking about
you
it has never failed
am I listening to a conversation
or even reading a speech
or
and you see then it reported
the
inevitably the reporter
picks some
headline characterization
that has very little to do
with what was really happening
but might be a headline grabber
that's at some kind of distortion
and there's a lack of understanding
of really what's going on
if it's okay let me ask you
a couple questions about cryptocurrency
you've had a few opinions
about bitcoin over the years
what are your thoughts about bitcoin today
its role
in the global financial system
and just in human society in general
well the evolution
of bitcoin over the years
is one of the things that
has
influence changes in my view
it
has proven itself
something like
10 11 years ago imagine
the programming of this
and here's you throw it out and that's the idea
it has not been hacked
it has
operated
it is built it has come
an amazing way
over that 11 years
to be
maybe probably the most excited
topic among
a lot of people
and has been used and
has now
obtained the status
of having imputed value
at the same time
it is one of those
assets that is an alternative
money I think we're
entering an era
where there's going to be
a competition of monies
because
of the printing of fiat money
and
the depreciated value
there will be a competition
of monies
and bitcoin is part
of that competition but there will be
many monies not just crypto monies
but there will be central
bank crypto monies
but there will be different
kinds of monies
and even monies
are things that you buy and sell
NFTs can become
a money
a type of money you own it
and it's an investment and you could say I'd rather own it
than own bitcoin
has Ray Dalio bought any NFTs?
not yet
but
only just because
I definitely want to buy
NFTs to just experience them
I think I should
produce one
I should have asked that
have you minted an NFT
just to know what it's like?
this stuff is happening
this stuff is real
and how it operates
but like all new real
things
some are going to go
it's like in the internet
in the year 2000
Pets.com
could have been a great but maybe
Pets.com doesn't make it and who knows
that's the beauty of the competitive system
that it will evolve
some things will be treasured
and some things will be trashed
so
but when I look at it
I think we are in an environment
of what is an alternative money
a money has two purposes
a medium of exchange
and a storehold of wealth
and we are looking for
and it's portable
and it's best
if it's recognized in other countries
so
gold is one of those
so I look at it
as an alternative gold
but I look at a number of things
and I think that
and gold is still my favorite
because
of certain qualities for example
you can't trace it
in bitcoin you can trace
who owns it where it's going
and so on governments can have that ability
to trace it and so on
but if it's a piece of coin
it's not connected
I think not connected has benefits
particularly in a world where
maybe connections can be more risky
so
and then also gold
has been
for many thousands of years
universally recognized as a source of money
and central banks
it's the third largest
source of money
in central bank reserves
I don't think bitcoin is going to
serve those types of purposes and so on
so for various reasons
I prefer gold to the other
but it's a little bit part of my mix
but then you look at it
it hit I think 69,000 this year
is the high bitcoin hit
do you think it's possible
you mentioned gold
do you think it's possible it reaches
very high numbers
like one million that some people talk about
I don't think that's possible
because the way I look at it is
there's a certain amount of
a certain amount of it
and there's a certain amount of gold
I'll use gold as a benchmark
the amount of it
is worth about
about $1 trillion
total crypto is about
$2.2 trillion
but let's say bitcoin
is about $5 trillion
if you take the amount of money
that is in
gold
that is not used for jewelry purposes
and not used by
central banks and I assume
bitcoin won't be used for jewelry purposes
or central bank purposes
that amount
in gold is about $5 trillion
so right now
if you were to
have a portfolio that has
gold and crypto
gold and bitcoin
it's worth about 20% of the value
of gold
do I think it's going to be
worth more than gold
in terms of that mix
I don't think it'll be worth more than
gold but let's say
it became worth
as much as gold
I don't believe it will be
I think the 20% sounds kind of about right
I really don't know what the right answer is
and then there's the question
of what is all of that
pool of money
let's say gold and gold equivalents
relative to everything else
does it go from
let's call it
$6, $7, $8 trillion to $16 trillion
maybe it could double
it depends what it is in the world environment
but basically
if you use gold as a measure
there's no
it just makes no sense
that it's going to be used
that much more
am I sure about that?
I'm not sure about anything
but logically it seems to me
that there's a limitation
on its price
in relationship to other things that are like it
let me ask
for your deep financial analysis
on a very important issue
I just talked a couple days ago
with Elon Musk
he wants to put a literal dogecoin on the moon
what are your thoughts about dogecoin
and
do you think it'll be the official currency
maybe
reserve currency on the moon
and on Mars?
My reaction is that's cute
I remember Elon when he first got
he first got his money from PayPal
I think he said to me
it was
he got $180 million, $90 million
he decided to say
why aren't we going to outer space
and he
wanted to take a spaceship
that would be modified
using Russian
technology
to put
a plant
and a watering can
on the moon
or on Mars
I think it was
and he said
first life on Mars
or first life on that
as an inspiring
notion
then there's always what's behind it
I have a lot of respect
for Elon's
ability to do other things
behind it
and so I would take that
as symbolic
and I'd be asking him what's behind it
what's next?
I'm also just on the topic of dogecoin
and memecoin and there's some aspect
of humor and lightheartedness
that's really interesting
about the way
we communicate what ideas become viral
how to captivate people
with ideas
there's something about taking things too seriously
that somehow slows it all down
and it's interesting
that's part of human nature somehow
humor is part of this whole thing
you've talked about the importance
of writing ideas down
and you have
in particular principles
and you have this really nice thing
in your book
I think there's such a brilliant way
you have such a brilliant way
of highlighting which parts are
extra important
and you make them bold
that's a brilliant idea
let me just ask the high level question of
what's a good system for
taking notes
well I find
that almost everything happens over
and over again
and we're in
the blizzard of these things happening
and what I found
is that
if I'm making a decision
that
after I make the decision usually
or right at the time
if I pause and reflect
and I write my principle down
in other words
principle is sort of a recipe
what would I use
how would I make that decision
and what are the criteria around it
I find that I make it much more
clear it becomes
clear and it applies
to the next thing that comes along
it'll be that way
because everything happens over and over
and over again and I think people make
the mistake of looking at
just the one like it's the first one
they have I don't know they have the
first problem of this sort
the first child or whatever it is
and this has been happening plenty of times
and so if you have the principles
I found that
that helped me think more clearly about it
and it helped me communicate
better like why
and so over the years
over the last 30 years or so
that's what I've done
I did it originally to communicate
very well with the people I work with
you know I set up my company
and it was very important to have good communication
communication and then we could
debate the principles
and so that's the process
I urge people to do that
there are many excellent
decision makers
and I just wish that they
wrote down their principles when
this set so
for example
we were talking about Henry Kissinger
and his new book is going to come out with a book
on leadership
and don't just describe the leaders
describe then
what about them were the essential
elements to make a good leader
under what circumstances
and so if we think about that
then also
then you begin to think in a
principled way
and then when you start to think in a
principled way life becomes
it's so much easier to make
decisions and it's so much less
confusing because it's like
coming up on a species
and you say okay well
what species is it
not just another it's a thing
no what species is it
and how do I deal with that species
effectively
and so that's what that is
and so I encourage people to write it down
I wish anybody who's successful
wrote down their principles
or their recipes for making those types
of decisions. So the events
of interest here
happens over and over and over
in similar ways as you're looking
for the patterns and you're defining the process
that's right
to respond to those patterns
and you call that the principles
and
that allows you to deal with the future effectively
so like that codifies
the lessons from the past to be able
to deal with the future
what advice do you have
for young folks today in high school
in college thinking about
how to live
have a career they can be proud of
or maybe have a life they can
be proud of. Know yourself
follow your passion
make your work
and passion the same thing
while considering the money part
because money will get you
freedom and choice
and be able to make that but
if you know yourself
feel the pull
and
and pursue that passion
along those lines by the way
I found
that using personality
profile tests has been very helpful
I've used those for about 25 years
for people to help to understand themselves
and understand each other so I created
a free one
that is called
principles you it's online
it's
had remarkable
loving people
who've taken it learn about themselves
but also you can put in
somebody else and it'll tell you about
your relationship with them
that's like 30 minutes is a quick
discovery but the main thing
is to understand on your journey
your hero's journey
when you're
that you will have
mistakes and you will have
weaknesses and
to
understand those not fight
those because
by understanding
mistakes you will learn not to make
mistakes again I have a principle
which is pain plus
reflection equals
progress and
so that reflection is important
to know yourself know your pulls
know your weaknesses
and when you also know
your weaknesses and the strengths of other people
there are people who
have strengths where you're weak
and you have strengths where they're weak
and to be able to work well
together is the most effective way
of achieving
success
so yeah it's that journey
and there's a life arc
and there's a journey
and you want to make it the best that you can
make it and it has
it's like a video game
you know it has the
challenges and the
obstacles and the learning
experiences and the temptations
and all of that
and the maximizing learning
to go where you want to go
to achieve the life you want is
the most important that's kind of maybe
a long winded way of seeing it
but to learn
I think I'll try to say it simply
there's a five step process
step one
is know
your goals know
what you're going after
you could have almost anything you want
but you can't have everything you want
and so you have to prioritize
and you move in that direction
on the way to your goals you're going to
encounter your problems and your obstacles
so identifying
step two is understanding
your problems and your obstacles
identify them
step three is to diagnose
them to get at the root cause
of the problem
and that could be
your causes but it could also be
your weaknesses or weaknesses of others
but you have to be objective about them
once you diagnose them
then you go to step four
which is to design
a way to get around them
and then
after you have that design
you implement that design
so you have to follow through and do it
and you do that
and that will then produce
its new results which should be better results
I call this
the looping process
it's the evolutionary looping process
and
you just keep doing that
and you learn over a period of time
and you move in the direction that you want
last question
and you only have one minute to answer
you dedicate the book
quote
to my grandchildren and those of their generation
who will be participants
in the continuation of the story
may the force of evolution
be with you
so let me ask where is this force of evolution
taking human civilization
and what in this story
that evolution is writing
gives you hope
evolution
is in a direction toward improvement
and the greatest force
is
man's capacity
to adapt and invent
and so you see in the charts in the book
you see that
this upward movement
life expectancy
health
all the things
that we think are better
you see there's a chart
and it shows that over a period of time
and you barely see
the downturns
from depressions and wars
in that
that is the greatest power
and man's ability to
invent and adapt
is evolution
and that's the greatest power
and that is what
gives me justifiable hope
and a continuation of that
like we mentioned with Elon
maybe we'll become a multiplanetary species
so not only will we
keep creating amazing things here on earth
we'll keep expanding out into the cosmos
my time horizon
isn't
yet but I
hope so and I agree
that that would be in the next
so I'm not going to ask you for the best financial
system on Mars
I think we'll focus on earth for now
thank you so much for your brilliance
for the books you've written
for the works you've done for the inspiration of millions
and thank you for
spending your valuable time here with me today
thank you
thanks for listening to this conversation with Ray Dalio
to support this podcast
please check out our sponsors in the description
and now
let me leave you with some words from Ray Dalio himself
every time
you confront something painful
you are at a potentially important juncture
in your life
you have the opportunity to choose healthy and painful truth
or
unhealthy but comfortable
delusion
thank you for listening and hope to see you
next time